Specify synchronization semantics of CUDA Array Interface (#5162)
numba/numba: docs/source/cuda/cuda_array_interface.rst

.. _cuda-array-interface:

================================
CUDA Array Interface (Version 3)
================================

The *CUDA Array Interface* (or CAI) is created for interoperability between

> different implementations of GPU array-like objects in various projects. The

Author: I've made it "CUDA array-like" - the "GPU" in "CUDA GPU" wasn't doing much work.

  If ``None`` then all values in **data** are valid. All elements of the mask
  array should be interpreted only as true or not true indicating which
  elements of this array are valid. This has the same definition as *mask* in
  the `numpy array interface`_.

  .. note:: Numba does not currently support working with masked CUDA arrays
            and will raise a `NotImplementedError` exception if one is passed
            to a GPU function.

> - **stream**: ``integer``

Reviewer: At some point in the future we might want to allow producers to (optinally) include a stream event with the CAI, where the stream event is enqueued immediately after the buffer is ready.  This unblocks some other use cases.

CC @bas-aarts

Reviewer 2: +1 to optionally allowing a stream event to wait on in the future

Author: A note has been added to suggest this might be added in future.

  An optional stream upon which synchronization may take place. See the
  :ref:`cuda-array-interface-synchronization` section below.

- **sync**: ``bool``

  Generally, if **sync** is given and is ``True``, then the consumer must either
  synchronize on the provided **stream** at the point of consumption, or enqueue
  operations on the data on the given **stream**. See

>   :ref:`cuda-array-interface-synchronization` for further details.

Reviewer: Why do we need both?  Can we say that if **stream** is present then the consumer must either
  synchronize on the provided **stream** at the point of consumption, or enqueue
  operations on the data on the given **stream**?

Reviewer 2: +1 to @sanjoy's comment that if a stream is provided it is implied that `sync=True` and that the consumer has the choice to synchronize or continue using that stream

Reviewer 3: I think it makes sense to combine them. 

If we don't, then we at least need to specify that they must come in pair (because they're listed as "optional"). In other words, when `sync` is defined in CAI, so is `stream` (it can be `None`, but the key must exist), and vice versa. This would save us a lot of headache to check for corner cases...

Author: `stream` and `sync` are now combined into just `stream`, and if `stream` is present then the consumer must sync on the provided stream at the point of consumption, or enqueue operations on that stream.

.. _cuda-array-interface-synchronization:

Synchronization
---------------

Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~

When discussing synchronization, the following definitions are used:

- *Producer*: The library / object on which ``__cuda_array_interface__`` is
  accessed.
- *Consumer*: The library / function that accesses the
  ``__cuda_array_interface__`` of the Producer.
- *User Code*: Code that induces a Producer and Consumer to share data through
  the CAI.
- *User*: The person writing or maintaining the User Code. The User may
  implement User Code without knowledge of the CAI, since the CAI accesses can
  be  hidden from their view.

In the following example:

.. code-block:: python

   import cupy
   from numba import cuda

   @cuda.jit
   def add(x, y, out):
       start = cuda.grid(1)
       stride = cuda.gridsize(1)
       for i in range(start, x.shape[0], stride):
           out[i] = x[i] + y[i]

   a = cupy.arange(10)
   b = a * 2
   out = cupy.zeros_like(a)

   add[1, 32](a, b, out)

When the ``add`` kernel is launched:

> - ``a``, ``b``, ``c`` are Producers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``a``, ``b``, ``out`` are Producers.
```

- The ``add`` kernel is the Consumer.
- The User Code is specifically ``add[1, 32](a, b, out)``.
- The author of the code is the User.

Design Motivations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Elements of the CAI design related to synchronization seek to fulfil these

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elements of the CAI design related to synchronization seek to fulfill these
```

requirements:

1. Producers and Consumers that exchange data through the CAI must be able to do
   so avoiding data races.
2. Requirement 1 should be met without requiring the user to be
   aware of any particulars of the CAI - in other words, exchanging data between
   Producers and Consumers that operate on data asynchronously should be correct

>    by default.

Reviewer 4: The text in this suggestion seems redundant with the paragraph below, maybe the text has been updated since, or am I missing something?

>    by default.

Reviewer 3: @pentschev Note that this comment was left back in July, and Graham just added the paragraph that you referred to so as to respond to my request. 🙂

>    by default.

Reviewer 4: That's what I thought, thanks for confirming Leo!

3. Where the User is aware of the particulars of the CAI and implementation
   details of the Producer and Consumer, they should be able to, at their
   discretion, override some of the synchronization semantics of the interface
   to reduce the synchronization overhead. Overriding synchronization semantics
   implies that:

   - The CAI design, and the design and implementation of the Producer and
     Consumer do not specify or guarantee correctness with respect to data
     races.
   - Instead, the User is responsible for ensuring correctness with respect to
     data races.
4. All operations and exchange of data are orchestrated from a single host
   thread. Use of multiple threads on the host is outside of the scope of this

>    version of the CAI. A future revision to the interface specification may

Reviewer: Do you see any specific issues arising from host multi-threading?  Or is this just to avoid scope creep?

Reviewer 3: My guess is it's intended to leave the per-thread default stream out of scope?

Reviewer 3: With @kkraus14's comment on the per-thread default stream (https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/5162#issuecomment-655535952), perhaps it is not an issue.

Author: I don't see any particular issues - I was just trying to keep the scope as small as possible for this revision.

  - When ``sync`` is ``True``, and the User has not overridden CAI
    synchronization semantics, then the Consumer must either:

    - Synchronize on the provided stream prior to accessing the data. If after
      synchronization the Consumer operates on the data in another stream, it
      must ensure that no computation can take place in the provided stream
      until its operations in its own choice of stream have taken place. This
      could be achieved by either:

      - Placing a wait on an event in the provided stream that occurs once all
        of the Consumer's operations on the data are completed, or
      - Avoiding returning control to the user code until after its operations
        on its own stream have completed.

    - Only enqueuing operations on the data in the provided stream. The Consumer
      may return control to the User code immediately after enqueueing its work,
      as the work will all be serialized on the exported array's stream, ensuring
      correctness even if the User code were to induce the Producer to
      subsequently start enqueueing more work on the same stream.

When exporting an array through the CAI, Producers must ensure that:

> * There is work on the data enqueued on at most one stream.

Reviewer: This is an implementation detail right?  For instance, the producer could:

1. Enqueue work on streams 7, 9, 15
2. Enqueue events immediately following the work on those streams
3. Enqueue wait-on-event on stream 3; and set **stream** to 3

?

In other words, the end result should be that the buffer is available to on **stream**, but that does not imply that all the work on the buffer actually happens on **stream**.

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: You're right, there was no need for the producer to just use one stream. The wording is changed to allow multiple streams, as long as synchronizing on the provided stream is sufficient to sync with all streams, using your example above @sanjoy

* If there is work on the data enqueued on a stream, then ``sync`` should be
  ``True``, and ``stream`` is the stream on which pending operations on the data
  are enqueued. There must not be any work enqueued on the data in any other
  streams.
* If there is no work enqueued on the data, then ``sync`` should be ``False``,
  and ``stream`` may be either ``None``, or a stream on which it is suggested

>   that work on the data is enqueued.

Reviewer: > on which it is suggested that work on the data is enqueued.

What is a use case for a suggested stream?

Reviewer 2: Given that if `sync=False` it's safe to use the data on any stream, and if `sync=True` then you need to either synchronize the given stream or enqueue onto the given stream (unless we add an awaitable event), it makes a lot more sense to me that we just remove the `sync` parameter

Author: I can't think of a use case I might have been imagining - this wording is now removed.

  If ``None`` then all values in **data** are valid. All elements of the mask
  array should be interpreted only as true or not true indicating which
  elements of this array are valid. This has the same definition as *mask* in
  the `numpy array interface`_.

  .. note:: Numba does not currently support working with masked CUDA arrays
            and will raise a `NotImplementedError` exception if one is passed
            to a GPU function.

> - **stream**: ``None`` or ``integer``

Author: Given that a the integer is a pointer to a `cudaStream_t`, and the MSB shouldn't be set for a pointer of Windows or Linux (on 64-bit at least) I think this should be OK.

  - If the Consumer synchronizes on the provided stream prior to accessing the
    data, then it must ensure that no computation can take place in the provided
    stream until its operations in its own choice of stream have taken place.
    This could be achieved by either:

    - Placing a wait on an event in the provided stream that occurs once all
      of the Consumer's operations on the data are completed, or
    - Avoiding returning control to the user code until after its operations
      on its own stream have completed.

  - If the consumer chooses to only enqueue operations on the data in the
    provided stream, then it may return control to the User code immediately
    after enqueueing its work, as the work will all be serialized on the
    exported array's stream. This is sufficient to ensure correctness even if
    the User code were to induce the Producer to subsequently start enqueueing
    more work on the same stream.

* If the User has set the Consumer to ignore CAI synchronization semantics, the
  Consumer may assume it can operate on the data immediately in any stream with
  no further synchronization, even if the ``stream`` member has an integer
  value.

> When exporting an array through the CAI, Producers must ensure that:

Reviewer 5: There should probably be a requirement here that the attached `stream` is valid for the lifetime of the CAI view. Otherwise if you export a CAI and then destroy the attached stream, you get a user after free hazard. This would be no different than the requirement that the viewed device memory not be freed while the CAI view is active.

Reviewer 3: I think this is addressed in the section "Lifetime management" in the same document? CAI doesn't handle object lifetime and it's user's responsibility to ensure this (https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/5323).

Reviewer 5: I think people are probably used to worrying about the lifetime management of the data, but may not be used to thinking about stream objects also having a lifetime.

Reviewer 3: Ah, it's probably a good point. Perhaps @gmarkall could add one sentence to "Lifetime management"?

Author: This is a good point - I will add something about lifetime management of streams, in at least one of this section and the Lifetime Management section.

Author: I've now added details on the lifetime management of streams in https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/5162/commits/9b25e18865400782ff888f377915308fb10f7576

  ``None``.
* Consumers may provide a configuration option to ignore the value of ``stream``
  and act as if it were ``None`` or not provided.  This elides synchronization
  on the Producer-provided streams, and allows enqueuing work on streams other
  than that provided by the Producer.

These options should be not be set by default in either a Producer or a
Consumer. The exact mechanism by which these options are set, and related
options that Producers or Consumers might provide to allow the user further
control over synchronization behavior are not prescribed by the CAI
specification.

Synchronization in Numba
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Numba is neither strictly a Producer nor a Consumer - it may be used to
implement either by a User. In order to facilitate the correct implementation of
synchronization semantics, Numba exhibits the following behaviors related to
synchronization of the interface:

- When Numba acts as a Consumer (for example when an array-like object is passed
  to a kernel launch): If ``stream`` is an integer, then Numba will immediately
  synchronize on the provided ``stream``, and set the *default stream* of the

>   array to the provided stream.

Reviewer 4: Why does Numba need to synchronize the stream? It could just launch the kernel on the same stream and then require no synchronization, no?

Author: A kernel can be called with multiple arguments, that might have different streams, e.g.:

```python
arr1.__cuda_array_interface__
# {'shape': (10,),
#  'strides': None,
#  'data': (140217113640960, False),
#  'typestr': '<f8',
#  'stream': 94913095065792,
#  'version': 3}

arr2.__cuda_array_interface__
# {'shape': (10,),
#  'strides': None,
#  'data': (140217113641472, False),
#  'typestr': '<f8',
#  'stream': 94913095181664,
#  'version': 3}

kernel[griddim, blockdim](arr1, arr2)
```

Also, the user might want to launch the kernel on a different stream, e.g. with:

```python
# (Note that Numba configurations are griddim, blockdim, stream, dynsharedmemsize, unlike CUDA C/C++)
kernel[griddim, blockdim, 0, stream](arr1, arr2)
```

Reviewer 4: Thanks @gmarkall , that makes total sense, I didn't consider more complex cases such as the example you wrote.

Reviewer 2: Is it Numba's responsibility to enforce this for the user? I.E. if read an array with a stream using `__cuda_array_interface__` and then launch a kernel on a different stream, is it Numba's responsibility to make that safe?

From the perspective of a library using Numba internally, I'd like to be able to just stream order everything and avoid synchronizing.

Author: It is, because of the requirement that interactions between Producers and Consumers should be correct by default (rather than relying on the User / User Code to do the right thing). I think the way to go here is to add a config flag to Numba that controls whether Numba enforces this or not, so that a naive use of the interface (calling a kernel on an object which supplies a stream) synchronizes and ensures correctness, but users who want more control can avoid the sync and just stream order everything. I'll add a flag for this to this PR, and also the code that syncs on kernel launch dependent on the value of the flag (which is presently missing from the implementation in this PR).

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, how hard would it be to have Numba scan the `stream` of all input array(s) and sychronize those stream(s) before the kernel launch? Or we could insert events into those stream(s) and then wait on those events in the stream of the kernel launch. If the stream(s) of the input array(s) is the same as the stream of the kernel launch then there's no need to synchronize or wait on events. This would maintain safety while also removing unneeded synchronization.

Author: It would be possible to do that, but it would be a bit of work to get the right information into the right places in Numba. For the purpose of this PR, I'd prefer to focus on:

1. Getting the specification right, for all libraries that use it
2. Coming up with a basic implementation in Numba that meets the requirements

then once the specification and basic Numba implementation are merged, then working on optimizing the Numba implementation.

To comment a bit more on the suggestion - I think in addition to synchronizing on the streams (or waiting on events on the array streams in the kernel stream), we'd also need to ensure synchronization following the kernel, because it launches asynchronously - so we'd have to insert an event in the kernel's stream after its launch, and waits in the streams of any of the arrays accessed via the CUDA Array Interface.

Author: > From the perspective of a library using Numba internally, I'd like to be able to just stream order everything and avoid synchronizing.

This should now be doable in this branch by setting `numba.config.CUDA_ARRAY_INTERFACE_SYNC = 0`.

Reviewer 2: Having the `sync` flag in `as_cuda_array` / `from_cuda_array_interface` makes this less of a concern.

If someone passes a non-numba object with CAI into a kernel call I guess it would sync for now unless the config is explicitly set?

Author: Yes, that would happen now unless the config flag is set.

Author: ... I'm trying to think if there is a non-horrible way to allow the option of a `sync=` flag to a kernel launch itself though.

Author: @kkraus14 for a non-syncing launch, it looks like it would be doable to replace the spelling:

```python
kernel[griddim, blockdim, stream, sharedmem](*args)
```

with

```python
kernel.configure(griddim, blockdim, stream=stream, sharedmem=sharedmem, sync=False)(*args)
```

(noting that `stream` and `sharedmem` are optional) - this would give some more granular control over whether a kernel launch syncs on the streams of arrays passed in through the CAI.

Would this be likely to be worth the effort to support a use case where syncs are disabled for individual launches, as opposed to globally?

Reviewer 2: My view is that having `numba.as_cuda_array(obj, sync=False)` gives an easy enough / clear enough path to avoid synchronizing the stream(s) before kernel launch. It wouldn't synchronize if passed numba device arrays, correct?

Author: That's correct, it won't synchronize if passed Numba device arrays.

Reviewer 2: Okay sounds great. I don't think it makes sense to put in the effort to add a `sync` kwarg to the kernel configuration then for now and we can revisit once we decide on the synchronization behavior we want to enforce more generally in Numba.

  If ``None`` then all values in **data** are valid. All elements of the mask
  array should be interpreted only as true or not true indicating which
  elements of this array are valid. This has the same definition as *mask* in
  the `numpy array interface`_.

  .. note:: Numba does not currently support working with masked CUDA arrays
            and will raise a `NotImplementedError` exception if one is passed
            to a GPU function.

- **stream**: ``None`` or a positive ``integer``

  An optional stream upon which synchronization must take place at the point of
  consumption, either by synchronizing on the stream or enqueuing operations on

>   the data on the given stream. Integer values in this entry are as follows:

Author: Yes, I will add this.

     Use of this exception should be avoided where possible, as it is provided
     for libraries that cannot implement the synchronization semantics without
     the involvement of the User - for example, those interfacing with
     third-party libraries oblivious to the CUDA Array Interface.

3. Where the User is aware of the particulars of the CAI and implementation
   details of the Producer and Consumer, they should be able to, at their
   discretion, override some of the synchronization semantics of the interface
   to reduce the synchronization overhead. Overriding synchronization semantics
   implies that:

   - The CAI design, and the design and implementation of the Producer and
     Consumer do not specify or guarantee correctness with respect to data
     races.
   - Instead, the User is responsible for ensuring correctness with respect to
     data races.

4. All operations and exchange of data are orchestrated from a single host
   thread. Use of multiple threads on the host is outside of the scope of this
   version of the CAI. A future revision to the interface specification may
   consider the use of multiple host threads once the current version and its

>    implementations have matured and become well-understood.

Author: I think we can, yes. I think this is mainly a hangover from when the approach looked completely different to its present form.

>    implementations have matured and become well-understood.

Author: This section is now removed.

    the User code were to induce the Producer to subsequently start enqueueing
    more work on the same stream.

* If the User has set the Consumer to ignore CAI synchronization semantics, the
  Consumer may assume it can operate on the data immediately in any stream with
  no further synchronization, even if the ``stream`` member has an integer
  value.

When exporting an array through the CAI, Producers must ensure that:

* If there is work on the data enqueued in one or more streams, then
  synchronization on the provided ``stream`` is sufficient to ensure
  synchronization with all pending work.

  - If the Producer has no enqueued work, or work only enqueued on the stream
    identified by ``stream``, then this condition is met.
  - If the Producer has enqueued work on the data on multiple streams, then it
    must enqueue events on those streams that follow the enqueued work, and
    then wait on those events in the provided ``stream``. For example:

    1. Work is enqueued by the Producer on streams ``7``, ``9``, and ``15``.
    2. Events are then enqueued on each of streams ``7``, ``9``, and ``15``.

>     3. Waits on the events from Step 2 are enqueued into stream ``3``, and the
>        ``stream`` entry is set to ``3``.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure about using `wait` as a noun. The call is `cudaStreamWaitEvent`, so I think it might be better to say what the Producer does using active voice, rather than use passive voice here.

```suggestion
    3. Producer tells stream ``3`` to wait on the events from Step 2, and the ``stream`` entry is set to ``3``.
```

* If there is no work enqueued on the data, then the ``stream`` entry may be
  either ``None``, or not provided.

Optionally, to facilitate the User to relax the conformance to synchronization
semantics:

* Producers may provide a configuration option to always set ``stream`` to
  ``None``.
* Consumers may provide a configuration option to ignore the value of ``stream``
  and act as if it were ``None`` or not provided.  This elides synchronization
  on the Producer-provided streams, and allows enqueuing work on streams other
  than that provided by the Producer.

> These options should be not be set by default in either a Producer or a

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
These options should not be set by default in either a Producer or a
```

options that Producers or Consumers might provide to allow the user further
control over synchronization behavior are not prescribed by the CAI
specification.

Synchronization in Numba
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Numba is neither strictly a Producer nor a Consumer - it may be used to
implement either by a User. In order to facilitate the correct implementation of
synchronization semantics, Numba exhibits the following behaviors related to
synchronization of the interface:

- When Numba acts as a Consumer (for example when an array-like object is passed
  to a kernel launch): If ``stream`` is an integer, then Numba will immediately
  synchronize on the provided ``stream``, and set the *default stream* of the
  array to the provided stream.
- When Numba acts as a Producer (when the ``__cuda_array_interface__`` property
  of a Numba Device Array is accessed): If the exported Device Array has a
  *default stream*, then it is given as the ``stream`` entry. Otherwise,
  ``stream`` is set to ``None``.

.. note:: In Numba's terminology, the *default stream* for a Device Array is a
          property of the Device Array specifying the stream in which Numba will

>           enqueue asynchronous transfers on if no other stream is provided as an

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
          enqueue asynchronous transfers if no other stream is provided as an
```

          argument to the function invoking the transfer. It is not the same as
          the `Default Stream
          <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#default-stream>`_
          in normal CUDA terminology.

> Resulting from these properties, these consequences are intended:

Reviewer 6: Just a bit clearer ("these properties" is a bit unclear -- which properties? The text earlier refers to Numba's synchronization behavior, which I believe is what is meant here?)

```suggestion
Numba's synchronization behavior results in the following intended consequences:
```

- Exchanging data either as a Producer or a Consumer should generally be

>   correct, provided the other side of the interaction also follows the CAI

Reviewer 6: "Should generally be correct" is a bit wishy-washy.  What specifically is meant here?

Author: I'm going to replace this with "will be correct without the need for any further action from the User". Does this now seem clear and specific?

Reviewer 6: Yep, sounds good.

  synchronization semantics.
- The User is expected not to launch kernels or other operations on streams that
  are not the default stream for their parameters, because doing so would
  violate the requirements for a Producer.

>   - Warning the user when they do this could be added. The present

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  - Warning the User when they do this could be added. The present
```

    implementation is a minimal prototype to help illustrate the interface
    specification.

> The user may override synchronization behaviour in Numba by setting the

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The User may override synchronization behaviour in Numba by setting the
```

Also I note British spelling of behaviour here, American earlier. Not a problem for an international project, IMO.

Author: Thanks for spotting the spelling - I've replaced it with the US version, as I try to consistently use US spellings in Numba.

environment variable ``NUMBA_CUDA_ARRAY_INTERFACE_SYNC`` or the config variable
``CUDA_ARRAY_INTERFACE_SYNC`` to ``0`` (see :ref:`GPU Support Environment
Variables <numba-envvars-gpu-support>`).  When set, Numba will not synchronize
on the streams of imported arrays, and it is the responsibility of the user to
ensure correctness with respect to stream synchronization. Synchronization when
creating a Numba Device Array from an object exporting the CUDA Array Interface
may also be elided by passing ``sync=False`` when creating the Numba Device
Array with :func:`numba.cuda.as_cuda_array` or
:func:`numba.cuda.from_cuda_array_interface`.

There is scope for Numba's synchronization implementation to be optimized in

> future, by eliding synchronizations when a kernel or driver API operation (e.g.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
the future, by eliding synchronizations when a kernel or driver API operation (e.g.
```

    Any use case where ``0`` might be given should either use ``None``, ``1``,
    or ``2`` instead for clarity.
  - ``1``: The legacy default stream.
  - ``2``: The per-thread default stream.
  - Any other integer: a ``cudaStream_t`` represented as a Python integer.

  See the
  :ref:`cuda-array-interface-synchronization` section below for further details.

  In a future revision of the interface, this entry may be expanded (or another
  entry added) so that an event to synchronize on can be specified instead of a
  stream.

.. _cuda-array-interface-synchronization:

Synchronization
---------------

Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~

When discussing synchronization, the following definitions are used:

- *Producer*: The library / object on which ``__cuda_array_interface__`` is
  accessed.
- *Consumer*: The library / function that accesses the
  ``__cuda_array_interface__`` of the Producer.
- *User Code*: Code that induces a Producer and Consumer to share data through
  the CAI.
- *User*: The person writing or maintaining the User Code. The User may
  implement User Code without knowledge of the CAI, since the CAI accesses can

>   be  hidden from their view.

Author: Edited.

   details of the Producer and Consumer, they should be able to, at their
   discretion, override some of the synchronization semantics of the interface
   to reduce the synchronization overhead. Overriding synchronization semantics
   implies that:

   - The CAI design, and the design and implementation of the Producer and
     Consumer do not specify or guarantee correctness with respect to data
     races.
   - Instead, the User is responsible for ensuring correctness with respect to
     data races.

Interface Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``stream`` entry enables Producers and Consumers to avoid hazards when
exchanging data. Expected behaviour of the Consumer is as follows:

* When ``stream`` is not present or is ``None``:

  - No synchronization is required on the part of the Consumer.
  - The Consumer may enqueue operations on the underlying data immediately on
    any stream.

* When ``stream`` is an integer, its value indicates the stream on which the
  Producer may have in-progress operations on the data, and which the Consumer
  is expected to either:

  - Synchronize on before accessing the data, or

>   - Enqueue operations in when accessing the data.

Author: The CUDA documentation seems to talk about enqueuing operations in streams rather than on them (e.g. [`cudaStreamAttachMemAsync` description](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__STREAM.html#group__CUDART__STREAM_1gc3bb7ccb325219073183a629d7c2756a)) so "in" is consistent with that usage.

>   - Enqueue operations in when accessing the data.

Reviewer 7: ok, will leave as is, thanks for checking.

  Consumer may assume it can operate on the data immediately in any stream with
  no further synchronization, even if the ``stream`` member has an integer
  value.

When exporting an array through the CAI, Producers must ensure that:

* If there is work on the data enqueued in one or more streams, then
  synchronization on the provided ``stream`` is sufficient to ensure
  synchronization with all pending work.

  - If the Producer has no enqueued work, or work only enqueued on the stream
    identified by ``stream``, then this condition is met.
  - If the Producer has enqueued work on the data on multiple streams, then it
    must enqueue events on those streams that follow the enqueued work, and
    then wait on those events in the provided ``stream``. For example:

    1. Work is enqueued by the Producer on streams ``7``, ``9``, and ``15``.
    2. Events are then enqueued on each of streams ``7``, ``9``, and ``15``.
    3. Producer then tells stream ``3`` to wait on the events from Step 2, and
       the ``stream`` entry is set to ``3``.

* If there is no work enqueued on the data, then the ``stream`` entry may be
  either ``None``, or not provided.

> Optionally, to facilitate the User to relax the conformance to synchronization

Author: Sounds good, but I'll also get rid of "the" as well.

semantics:

* Producers may provide a configuration option to always set ``stream`` to
  ``None``.
* Consumers may provide a configuration option to ignore the value of ``stream``

>   and act as if it were ``None`` or not provided.  This elides synchronization

Author: There's no material difference - the option to not provide `stream` means that Consumers implementing V3 of the interface will accept arrays from producers implementing V2 without complaint.

>   and act as if it were ``None`` or not provided.  This elides synchronization

Reviewer 7: thanks for confirming

  on the Producer-provided streams, and allows enqueuing work on streams other
  than that provided by the Producer.

These options should not be set by default in either a Producer or a Consumer.
The exact mechanism by which these options are set, and related options that
Producers or Consumers might provide to allow the user further control over

> synchronization behavior are not prescribed by the CAI specification.

Author: This sentence is just "upside down" - I think I can make it clearer still another way.

> synchronization behavior are not prescribed by the CAI specification.

Author: I've changed the sentence so it begins by stating what the specification doesn't prescribe, so that you don't need to get all the way to the end of the sentence to find out what is being said of its subjects.

Synchronization in Numba
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Numba is neither strictly a Producer nor a Consumer - it may be used to
implement either by a User. In order to facilitate the correct implementation of
synchronization semantics, Numba exhibits the following behaviors related to
synchronization of the interface:

- When Numba acts as a Consumer (for example when an array-like object is passed
  to a kernel launch): If ``stream`` is an integer, then Numba will immediately

>   synchronize on the provided ``stream``. A Numba Device Array created from an

Author: I tried to avoid directly indicating a `DeviceArray`, because it might also be a mapped or managed array. Perhaps "Numba CUDA Array" will be clearer without being overly prescriptive as to the type?

>   synchronize on the provided ``stream``. A Numba Device Array created from an

Reviewer 7: think that's a good idea, as this isn't just about device arrays.

>   synchronize on the provided ``stream``. A Numba Device Array created from an

Author: On second thoughts, Numba always creates a `DeviceNDArray` when consuming, so it does make sense to link to it.

>   synchronize on the provided ``stream``. A Numba Device Array created from an

Author: Added a link to the `DeviceNDArray` - some edits to the later text were also added (sometimes changing "Device Array" to "CUDA Array" or just "array") to ensure the section as a whole is clear and consistent.

          property of the Device Array specifying the stream in which Numba will
          enqueue asynchronous transfers if no other stream is provided as an
          argument to the function invoking the transfer. It is not the same as
          the `Default Stream
          <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#default-stream>`_
          in normal CUDA terminology.

Numba's synchronization behavior results in the following intended
consequences:

- Exchanging data either as a Producer or a Consumer will be correct without
  the need for any further action from the User, provided that the other side
  of the interaction also follows the CAI synchronization semantics.
- The User is expected to either:

  - Avoid launching kernels or other operations on streams that
    are not the default stream for their parameters, or
  - When launching operations on a stream that is not the default stream for
    a given parameter, they should then insert an event into the stream that
    they are operating in, and wait on that event in the default stream for
    the parameter. For an example of this, :ref:`see below
    <example-multi-streams>`.

> The User may override synchronization behavior in Numba by setting the

Author: Thanks - I think it would be more direct as "Numba's synchronization behavior" instead of "the synchronization behavior in Numba"

> The User may override synchronization behavior in Numba by setting the

Reviewer 7: sounds good.

Now we launch the kernel in the other stream:

.. code-block:: python

   nthreads = 256
   nblocks = N // nthreads

   initialize_array[nthreads, nblocks, kernel_stream](x)

If we were to pass ``x`` to a Consumer now, there is a risk that it may operate on
it in ``array_stream`` whilst the kernel is still running in ``kernel_stream``.
To prevent operations in ``array_stream`` starting before the kernel launch is
finished, we create an event and wait on it:

.. code-block:: python

   # Create event
   evt = cuda.event()
   # Record the event after the kernel launch in kernel_stream
   evt.record(kernel_stream)
   # Wait for the event in array_stream
   evt.wait(array_stream)

It is now safe for ``other_cai_library`` to consume ``x``:

.. code-block:: python

   other_cai_library.consume(x)

Lifetime management
-------------------

Data
~~~~

Obtaining the value of the ``__cuda_array_interface__`` property of any object
has no effect on the lifetime of the object from which it was created. In
particular, note that the interface has no slot for the owner of the data.

The User code must preserve the lifetime of the object owning the data for as

> long as the Consumer might user it.

Author: Good catch :-)

              to a GPU function.

Synchronization
---------------

For its implicit synchronization, the consumer is expected to operate on the

> data on the default stream, or synchronized with an event on the default stream.

Reviewer 3: I think it might be necessary to clarify the "consumer" as the "user" in order to accommodate situations like [in mpi4py](https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/5162#issuecomment-579896688) or [in RMM](https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/5162#issuecomment-579904027)?

  transfers), and ``sync=False`` should be passed to functions importing arrays
  through the interface.

Lifetime management
-------------------

Obtaining the value of the ``__cuda_array_interface__`` property of any object
has no effect on the lifetime of the object from which it was created - in
particular one should note that the interface does not specify a slot for the
owner of the data.

As a result, it is imperative for a consumer to retain a reference to the object
owning the data for as long as the consumer makes use of the data.

Lifetime management in Numba
----------------------------

Numba provides two mechanisms for creating device arrays depending on the
required effect on the lifetime of the object from which they are created:

- :func:`cuda.as_cuda_array`: This creates a device array that holds a reference
  to the owning object. As long as a reference to the device array is held, its
  underlying data will also be kept alive, even if all other references to the
  original owning object have been dropped.
- :func:`from_cuda_array_interface`: This creates a device array with no
  reference to the owning object by default. The owning object, or some other

>   object to be considered the owner can be passed in the ``owner`` parameter.

Reviewer 8: `from_cuda_array_interface` looks like a useful function. Didn't realize it was there. Also wasn't able to find it in the docs. Have added issue ( https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/5164 ) to document this.

Author: Thanks! I had noticed the links to them in the docs weren't resolving but hadn't looked into it yet...
